---
title: The Day I Didn't Learn Fear
publish: true
date: 2024-08-22
tags: [swimming, courage, childhood, mentorship, learning, overcoming-fear, personal-growth, education, life-lessons, bravery, water-sports, coaching, personal-narrative, memoir, inspiration]
---

I learned to swim in middle school. I was tiny, the pool was massive, and it was my first day. My coach was a thin man, about my grandfather's age. He was strict, direct, and had a refreshing, no-nonsense wisdom that bordered on charming.

I got in the water ---aaah, it's cold! But no worries; I knew how to float. A bunch of us started floating in the shallow end.

For a few days, we practiced floating and breathing. Then, one calm, ordinary day, I heard the coach yell, "Out of the water, everyone! We're heading to the deep end."

Wait, what? I don't know how to swim. Old man, you haven't taught me how to swim yet! The water's deep, and I'm tiny. I can't swim.

As I walked to the other side of the pool, my legs tingled, and my heart sank. I wasn't sure what I was feeling--fear, maybe?

We got to the deep end, and without warning, he pushed me in.

One moment there was air, and now there's water --above me, below me, all around me. I tried to grasp onto something, but there was nothing. I looked for the surface --oh, I could see it. But it was further away, deeper in the cold silence, away from where I desperately wanted to be.

What happened next is why I love the water.
I stopped struggling. I let go and allowed myself to sink. Suddenly, I found the surface. With a determination I didn't know I had, I pushed myself upward. I broke through the water, gasped for air, and floated to the side. I looked at the old man. He was watching me, searching my eyes for fear. But he didn't see any. He smiled, then threw the next kid in.

I never feared water. I never got the chance to. My coach killed that fear before it could even take root.

I'm forever grateful to that old bastard for that push into the deep water.
